📊 Excel Mini Project Details
Title:

Karate Student Data Management & Analysis System using Advanced Excel

1. Objective of the Project

The objective of this project is to manage and analyze karate students’ data efficiently using advanced Microsoft Excel features. The project focuses on automating calculations, organizing data, and generating meaningful insights through formulas, functions, and dashboards.

2. Tools & Technologies Used

Microsoft Excel

Excel Functions & Formulas

Pivot Tables & Pivot Charts

Data Sorting & Filtering

Dashboard Design

3. Dataset Description

The dataset consists of student records from different DOJOs. The main fields included are:

Student Name

Date of Birth (DOB)

Gender

DOJO Name

Instructor Name

Food Preference (Veg/Non-Veg)

Guardian Name

4. Project Tasks & Implementation
4.1 Finding Age from DOB

Age is calculated using Excel date functions.

Formula used:

=DATEDIF(DOB, TODAY(), "Y")

This automatically updates the age based on the current date.

4.2 Sorting Data by DOJO Name

The dataset is sorted alphabetically based on DOJO Name.

Helps in grouping students belonging to the same training center.

4.3 Statistical Analysis

Using Excel functions and Pivot Tables:

Total number of students → =COUNTA()

Number of male students → =COUNTIF(Gender, "Male")

Number of female students → =COUNTIF(Gender, "Female")

Number of guardians → =COUNTA(Guardian Column)

Veg vs Non-Veg count → =COUNTIF(Food Preference, "Veg")

4.4 Categorizing Students by Age

Students are divided into categories using nested IF formulas:

Age Range	Category
Below 14	Sub-Junior
14–15	Cadet
16–17	Junior
18–20	U-21
Above 20	Senior

Formula used:

=IF(Age<14,"Sub-Junior",
 IF(Age<=15,"Cadet",
 IF(Age<=17,"Junior",
 IF(Age<=20,"U-21","Senior"))))
4.5 Instructor-wise Student List (VLOOKUP & HLOOKUP)

VLOOKUP is used to fetch student details based on Instructor Name.

HLOOKUP is used where data is arranged horizontally.

Example:

=VLOOKUP(InstructorName, TableRange, ColumnIndex, FALSE)

This helps in quickly viewing all students under a specific instructor.

4.6 Dashboard Creation

An interactive dashboard is created using:

Pivot Tables

Pivot Charts

Slicers

The dashboard displays:

Total Students

Gender Distribution

Category-wise Distribution

DOJO-wise Student Count

Food Preference Analysis

5. Key Features of the Project

Automated age calculation

Dynamic categorization of students

Instructor-wise data retrieval

Clean and structured dataset

Interactive visual dashboard

6. Conclusion

This project demonstrates how Microsoft Excel can be effectively used for real-world data management and analysis. It improves efficiency, reduces manual effort, and provides clear insights through visualization tools. The system can be further enhanced by integrating real-time data updates and advanced analytics.